# Bitter crab disease dynamics in eastern Bering Sea Tanner and snow crab
Authors: Erin J. Fedewa, Michael A. Litzow, Pamela C. Jensen, Leah S. Zacher, W. Christopher Long, Stan Kotwicki, Michael J. Malick, Hamish J. Small


The BCS_2014-2016 repository includes all script, output and figures used to produce a manuscript exploring bitter crab disease dynamics and potential drivers of Hematodinium infection. This collaborative paper utilizes a disease monitoring dataset collected during the Alaska Fisheries Science Center's Eastern Bering Sea bottom trawl survey from 2015 - 2017. This paper has been submitted for publication in ....

## Abstract
Bitter crab disease, caused by a parasite dinoflagellate infection of the genus Hematodinium, has severe negative implications for the productivity of Bering Sea crab populations and commercial fisheries that harvest the resource. Despite the ecological and commercial importance of Bering Sea Tanner and snow crab, we have a limited understanding of factors that may increase the occurrence of and susceptibility to Hematodinium infections. Here, we investigate bitter crab disease dynamics at eastern Bering Sea Tanner and snow crab monitoring sites across a three year period to 1) evaluate the sensitivity of disease detection methods, 2) determine drivers of Hematodinium infection, and 3) compare disease occurrence among years. We confirm that macroscopic diagnostic methods are highly insensitive for detecting Hematodinium infections on summer bottom trawl surveys and miss up to 93% of infections detected by molecular methods. Using Bayesian regression models, our results show that Hematodinium infection risk is highly dependent on host size and sampling date. Small Tanner and snow crab (<30mm carapace width) are nearly twice as susceptible to infection than larger crab, and infections peaked in late-July to early-August in both populations. Most notably, our findings present evidence for a bitter crab disease epizootic in Bering Sea Tanner and snow crab, with peak prevalence exceeding 50% at several monitoring sites in 2017. We suggest that population size structure likely plays an important role in mediating disease risk, whereas the effect of environmental drivers is less certain. Our study provides the first step in developing predictive models for bitter crab disease dynamics in Tanner and snow crab and warrants continued monitoring given high infection prevalence in the Bering Sea.

## Software implementation
All source code used to generate the results and figures in the paper are in the script folder. Multilevel Bayesian models are run in the brms package. The data used in this study is provided in the data folder and all results generated by the code are saved in output. You can download a copy of all the files in this repository by cloning the git repository: https://github.com/AFSC-Shellfish-Assessment-Program/BCS_2014-2016.git

## License
This repository is a scientific product and is not official communication of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or the United States Department of Commerce. All NOAA GitHub project code is provided on an ‘as is’ basis and the user assumes responsibility for its use. Any claims against the Department of Commerce or Department of Commerce bureaus stemming from the use of this GitHub project will be governed by all applicable Federal law. Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their endorsement, recommendation or favoring by the Department of Commerce. The Department of Commerce seal and logo, or the seal and logo of a DOC bureau, shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any commercial product or activity by DOC or the United States Government.

Software code created by U.S. Government employees is not subject to copyright in the United States (17 U.S.C. §105). The United States/Department of Commerce reserve all rights to seek and obtain copyright protection in countries other than the United States for Software authored in its entirety by the Department of Commerce. To this end, the Department of Commerce hereby grants to Recipient a royalty-free, nonexclusive license to use, copy, and create derivative works of the Software outside of the United States.

